# Mixins

Elix elements use functional mixins as a standard way to share aspects of
behavior and public APIs. Such mixins take the form of a plain JavaScript
function that accepts a class argument and returns an extended class adding the
mixin's functionality:

    const GreetMixin = (base) => class Greet extends base {
      // Mixin defines properties and methods here.
      greet() {
        return 'Hello';
      }
    };

A mixin is applied simply by invoking the mixin as a function, typically
in the process of defining a class. In the case of mixins for web components,
the base class could be HTMLElement:

    class GreetElement extends GreetMixin(HTMLElement) {}
    let obj = new MyElement();
    obj.greet(); // "Hello"


<div class="pageNavigation">
  <h2>Mixins</h2>
  <ul>
    <li><a href="AttributeMarshallingMixin">AttributeMarshallingMixin</a></li>
    <li><a href="ClickSelectionMixin">ClickSelectionMixin</a></li>
    <li><a href="ContentItemsMixin">ContentItemsMixin</a></li>
    <li><a href="SlotContentMixin">SlotContentMixin</a></li>
    <li><a href="DirectionSelectionMixin">DirectionSelectionMixin</a></li>
    <li><a href="FocusRingMixin">FocusRingMixin</a></li>
    <li><a href="KeyboardDirectionMixin">KeyboardDirectionMixin</a></li>
    <li><a href="KeyboardMixin">KeyboardMixin</a></li>
    <li><a href="KeyboardPagedSelectionMixin">KeyboardPagedSelectionMixin</a></li>
    <li><a href="KeyboardPrefixSelectionMixin">KeyboardPrefixSelectionMixin</a></li>
    <li><a href="SelectedItemTextValueMixin">SelectedItemTextValueMixin</a></li>
    <li><a href="AriaListMixin">AriaListMixin</a></li>
    <li><a href="SelectionInViewMixin">SelectionInViewMixin</a></li>
    <li><a href="ShadowReferencesMixin">ShadowReferencesMixin</a></li>
    <li><a href="ShadowTemplateMixin">ShadowTemplateMixin</a></li>
    <li><a href="SingleSelectionMixin">SingleSelectionMixin</a></li>
  </ul>
</div>


## Background

All mixin strategies wrestle with how to order mixin property/method effects and
avoid naming conflicts. Common solutions involve destructively modifying a
target object's prototype, or generating property/method wrappers to broker name
mixin property/method invocations. Those solutions can create brittle solutions
which are hard to debug, maintain, or extend.

In contrast, functional mixins extend the JavaScript prototype chain: a
standard, performant, and well-documented feature of the JavaScript language.
Additional benefits:

1. Mixin effects on the prototype chain is deterministically established by the
   order of mixin application. As will be discussed later, mixins will generally
   be designed so that the order of application does not matter. The point here
   is that any property or invocations can be reasoned about. As with any
   JavaScript property/method invoked on an object, the JavaScript engine walks
   up the prototype chain to find the first prototype which implements the given
   property/method. Applying two mixins to a base class, e.g.,
   `FooMixin(BarMixin(HTMLElement))` creates a prototype chain in which the
   prototype added by `FooMixin` is inspected first, then the prototype added by
   `BarMixin`, and finally the prototype of `HTMLElement` (and `Object`).
2. Any property/method invocation can invoke base class functionality (that is,
   implementations further up the prototype chain) via the standard `super`
   keyword. This allows multiple mixins to cooperatively provide multiple
   implementations of properties and methods with the same name. The invocation
   of `super` is explicit, making the code easier to understand, trace, and step
   through.

Because mixins define behavior through composition, they do not impose the
limitations of a single-inheritance class hierarchy. That said, a developer can
still use them within a class hierarchy if that's suitable for their
application. For example, one can compose a set of mixins to create a custom
base class from which other classes derive. But the use of such a base class is
not required.

A core virtue of a functional mixin is that one does not need to use any library
to apply it. They're just functions, and can be applied just by invoking them.
This lets developers use these mixins with any conventional means of defining
JavaScript classes — they don't have to invoke a proprietary class factory, nor
do they have to load a separate framework or runtime.

The React community promotes the use of
[higher-order components](https://facebook.github.io/react/blog/2016/07/13/mixins-considered-harmful.html)
instead of classic mixins. Functional mixins, as described here, share at least
one key characteristic with React's higher-order components: both use functions
that accept a class and return a new class. In React's case, the new class
_wraps_ an instance of the original class. In a functional mixin, the new class
_extends_ the original class. In both cases, the function allows more developer
control over what is happening, and the function's effects are made more readily
apparent to someone reading the code.

Overall, experience with the use of functional mixins along the lines described
here suggest that they are sufficiently flexible and powerful to create a large
web component library at Elix's scale.


# Mixin conventions

To ensure that Elix mixins cooperate consistently via the prototype chain, they
will follow standardized property and method composition rules explained in
detail further below. Developers interested in creating their own components
with Elix mixins will find it helpful to follow those same conventions to ensure
that their code can interoperate cleanly with Elix's.


## Naming

Mixins in this project are named with an initial capital: `SampleMixin`, not
`sampleMixin`. The initial capital is intended to suggest their status as
partial classes.

The mixin name should generally end in "Mixin". By convention, the mixin's name
_without_ the "Mixin" part should be used as the name of the returned class:

    const SampleMixin = (base) => class Sample extends base { ... }

Here, `SampleMixin` is the visible name of the function that can be applied to a
class to get back an extended class. The class name `Sample` is actually not
required by JavaScript, but is helpful for debugging. It allows the debugger to
show you a meaningful name when you inspect the component's prototype chain at
runtime.


## String names vs `Symbol` keys

Elix mixins use string names for properties and methods which are properly part
of a component's public API. Properties and methods which are only meant as an
internal means for communication between a component and its mixins are
identified with `Symbol` keys.

    // This symbol must be exported so other mixins can see it.
    export const internalMethodSymbol = Symbol('internalMethod');

    export const SampleMixin = (base) => class Sample extends base {

      // Method exposed in a component's public API.
      publicMethod() {
        ...
      }

      // Method only invoked by the component or other mixins.
      [internalMethodSymbol]() {
        ...
      }

    };

The Elix project will designate a standard set of property and method
identifiers to facilitate communication between a mixin and other mixins or the
overall component. As described above, those identifiers will be strings for
public API members and `Symbol` keys for internal members. The designation of
standard identifiers should help further reduce the chance for naming conflicts
if an external developer applies an Elix mixin to their component. The use of
standard string names for public members also helps ensure API consistency.


## Mixin order independence

A critical goal is designing web component mixins which can be applied in any
order. That is, if `FooMixin()` and `BarMixin()` are functional mixins, then
both `FooMixin(BarMixin(HTMLElement))` and `BarMixin(FooMixin(HTMLElement))`
should return classes whose prototype chains are slightly different, but whose
behavior is otherwise the same. Order independence makes it much easier for
developers to use mixins.

The general nature of this mixin architecture does not guarantee order
independence: two people could easily write two mixins that modify the same
element attribute, in which case one mixin might overwrite the value written
by the other. That means Elix mixins must be designed to have relatively
isolated effects.

Experience suggests that is possible at the scale of this project. That is, when
designing a collection of components, each of which is built from 5–20 mixins,
it's possible to write mixins such that their effects are generally independent,
and can be applied in any order.


# Semantic mixin factoring

A core intention behind the use of mixins for this project is to factor
component services into separable but complementary mixins. This loose
arrangement permits a close correspondance between behaviors and code modules,
which makes the code easier to debug and maintain. It also allows mixins to
be flexibly recombined in new ways for new situations.

Web component mixins will generally fall into three categories: 1) mixins that
deal with user input (via event handlers) or other external factors, 2) mixins
that perform purely internal work, often mapping from one level of abstraction
to another, and 3) mixins that deal with rendering (via DOM manipulations) and
other forms of output.

Mixins can communicate with each other and with the component they are part of
via properties and methods that have standardized string names or shared
`Symbol` keys. For example, a mixin may invoke a method with the expectation
that the real implementation of that method will be provided by another mixin
or the overall component.

To illustrate a typical separation of concerns using mixins, let's consider a
modestly complex example. Suppose we wish to create a component that lets the
user select a child element by clicking on it. Rather than writing this in a
monolithic fashion, where the component directly handles all aspects of this
situation, we separate the concerns into three mixins:

1. A ClickSelectionMixin that wires up a click handler to listen for clicks on
   the component's children. When a child is clicked, the mixin sets a property
   with the standardized name `selectedItem` to the clicked child.
2. A SingleSelectionMixin that tracks a single selected item. It defines a
   `selectedItem` property whose setter saves the selected element, and a getter
   that can be used later to retrieve that element. The `selectedItem` setter
   also invokes a method `applySelection` for any item that becomes selected or
   deselected.
3. A SelectionClassMixin that toggles a `selected` CSS class on elements that
   become selected or deselected. It does this by item. It does this by defining
   an implementation of the `applySelection` method that applies the `selected`
   CSS class to an individual item. The actual visible effects of the `selected`
   class can then be defined via CSS rules for `.selected`.

Please see this complete [Sample Mixin-Based
Component](http://jsbin.com/wikowa/edit?html,output) for a functioning demo.
The general structure of the sample implementation is as follows:

    // Define three mixins.
    const ClickSelectionMixin = base => class ClickSelection extends base {...}
    const SingleSelectionMixin = base => class SingleSelection extends base {...}
    const SelectionClassMixin = base => class SelectionClass extends base {...}

    // Apply the mixins.
    class TestElement extends
        ClickSelectionMixin(SelectionClassMixin(SingleSelectionMixin(HTMLElement))) {}
    customElements.define('test-element', TestElement);

Each mixin performs a single task. When all three are applied to a component
class, the three work together to give the component basic selection behavior.
The user can click a child element of the component and that selected element
will be highlighted via whatever styling the application deems appropriate.
Moreover, the application can programmatically set or get the component's
selected child via its public `selectedItem` property.

Such a factoring may initially feel overly complex, but has some key advantages:

* Each mixin is focused on doing just one job well. Even though these jobs
  sound simple, in the real-world each actually entails considerable complexity.
* The loose arrangement permits a substantial degree of developer freedom. A
  developer who decides they want to handle clicks differently can replace
  ClickSelectionMixin with code of their own, and still take advantage of the
  other two mixins. Or they could change the rendering of the selection by
  replacing SelectionClassMixin. Or they could keep all three mixins and add
  others to handle other forms of input or other rendering effects (e.g., ARIA
  support).
* In general, this factoring allows components with radically different
  interaction models or visual presentations to nevertheless share a
  considerable amount of user interface logic.


# Composition rules for mixin methods and properties

Mixins functions that extend a class by creating a subclass should generally
*extend* base class methods and properties, not replace them.

The default behavior in JavaScript is for subclass members to override members
with corresponding names in base classes. That behavior may be useful in cases
where a subclass is extending a known, fixed base class. In those cases, the
subclass author generally knows what the base class can do, and can invoke base
class behavior if desired via `super`. Depending on knowledge of the base class,
the subclass author may elect not to invoke the base class implementation.

However, mixins may be applied to a variety of base classes, including classes
returned by other mixins. Mixin authors should generally write methods and
properties that invoke base class functionality rather than override it. This
increases the chance that base class functionality will continue to work even in
the presence of mixins.

Generally, this means that mixin methods and properties should invoke `super`.
Unlike the normal application of `super` in subclasses, mixins do not have any
guarantee that a base class actually implements a given method or property.
Hence, the mixin cannot just blindly invoke `super`. It must first look further
up the prototype chain for the presence of the method or property before
deciding whether it can invoke `super`.

There is no single solution that works for all kinds of mixin members. Instead,
if you are writing an Elix mixin, you can follow the conventions presented here.


## Extending a method known to not return a result

This is the simplest case. Your mixin method should check to see whether the
base class defines a method of the same name, and if so, invoke that method. In
most cases, you should invoke the super method before performing your own mixin
work.

    const SampleMixin = (base) => class Sample extends base {
      method(...args) {
        if (super.method) { super.method(...args); }
        // Do your mixin work here.
      }
    };

Be sure to pass along any arguments to the base class’ method implementation.


## Extending a method that may return a result

If the base class method might return a result, you should capture that result
before doing mixin work. Your mixin has the opportunity to modify the base
method’s result, or can leave it unchanged. In any event, your mixin method
should itself return a result.

    const SampleMixin = (base) => class Sample extends base {
      method(...args) {
        let result = super.method && super.method(...args);
        // Do your mixin work here, potentially modifying result.
        return result;
      }
    };


## Extending a property getter with no setter

If you’re certain that a property will *never* have a setter, you can omit
defining a setter. But if any other mixin might define a setter for the
property, you need to define one, too. Otherwise the absence of a setter will
implicitly hide a setter further up the prototype chain.

To avoid this problem, define a default setter that checks to see whether it
should invoke super. To check the base class for the existence of a property,
use the idiom, `'name' in base.prototype`.

If your getter wants to completely override the base class implementation, it
does not need to invoke super.

    const SampleMixin = (base) => class Sample extends base {
      get property() {
        // Do your mixin work here.
      }
      set property(value) {
        if ('property' in base.prototype) { super.property = value; }
      }
    };

Note the use of `base.prototype` instead of `super` in the setter, as `'name' in
super` is not legal ES6. However, the use of `super` *is* required in the
actual `super.prototype = value` assignment which follows. Using
`base.prototype` there wouldn’t work: it would overwrite the base’s setter
instead of invoking it.


## Extending a property setter with no getter

It’s possible that your mixin will want to define a setter but not a getter:
your mixin may want to do work when the property changes, but leave the actual
storage and retrieval of the property to a base class. (See the discussion of
"backed" properties below.)

In such situations, you must still supply a default getter that invokes super.
(Otherwise, the absence of a getter in your mixin will implicitly override a
getter defined further up the prototype chain.) Your getter does not need to
check to see whether it should invoke super — if the base class doesn’t define
the property, the result will be undefined anyway.

    const SampleMixin = (base) => class Sample extends base {
      get property() {
        return super.property;
      }
      set property(value) {
        if ('property' in base.prototype) { super.property = value; }
        // Do your mixin work here.
      }
    };


## Extending a property with both getter and setter

This is a combination of the above two rules. The getter will generally want to
override the base class property, so it doesn’t need to invoke super. The setter
should use the same technique above to see whether it should invoke super.

    const SampleMixin = (base) => class Sample extends base {
      get property() {
        // Do your mixin work here.
      }
      set property(value) {
        if ('property' in base.prototype) { super.property = value; }
        // Do your mixin work here.
      }
    };


## Extending a property with a getter and setter that "backs" a value

A common case of the above rule is a mixin that will store the value of
property for the benefit of other mixins and classes. Such a mixin is said to
"back" the property.

In this situation, the recommendation is to have the setter record the new value
of the property *before* invoking `super`. This ensures that, if the base class'
property setter immediately inspects the property's value via the getter, the
latest value will be returned. All other work of the mixin should be done
*after* invoking `super`, as usual.

    let propertySymbol = Symbol('property');

    const SampleMixin = (base) => class Sample extends base {
      get property() {
        return this[propertySymbol];
      }
      set property(value) {
        // Save latest value before invoking super.
        this[propertySymbol] = value;
        // At this point, getter invocations will get the right value.
        // Now invoke super.
        if ('property' in base.prototype) { super.property = value; }
        // Do any other mixin work here.
      }
    };


# Wrapper mixins

Elix includes functional mixins called [wrappers](wrappers) that add elements to
a base class' template. See that area for details.


# Performance

Our explorations suggest that Elix components might end up with 5–20 mixins
each. Those components would have deeper JavaScript prototype chains than is
typically encountered in traditional class hierarchies. Some people have
expressed concerns about the performance impact of such deep prototype chains.

We care a great deal about performance, so the topic deserves careful study. But
initial testing suggests that the performance impact of a deep prototype chain
on its own may be negligible, and in any event comparable to that of other means
of composing component behavior from smaller parts.

Early in our explorations, we conducted a [simple peformance
comparison](https://github.com/ComponentKitchen/wc-perf) of Polymer 1.0
components with 20 behaviors against a plain JavaScript component with
20 mixins. The results described there suggest that this mixin approach
does not incur a significant performance penalty just by virtue of creating
long prototype chains.

That is not a definitive result, but it seems reasonable. As the prototype
chain is a core part of JavaScript, it stands to reason that JavaScript engines
work hard to make property and method invocation along the chain as fast as
possible.

That's not to say that all mixins are automatically fast. A poorly-written mixin
could, of course, have serious performance problems for other reasons. So
ongoing performance testing will be critical in creating high-quality mixins and
components for Elix.


# Testing

The entire point of mixins is to reuse functionality across components, so it's
to everyone's benefit for mixins to be as well-tested as possible. Each mixin
should have a reasonably complete suite of unit tests to exercise its
functionality.

Mixin unit tests should try to test the mixin in isolation, and avoid including
other mixins or base classes. Typically, that means applying the mixin directly
to `HTMLElement` to create a custom element class that can be used to create
unit test fixtures. Example: suppose a simple mixin looks like:

    const FooMixin = (base) => class Foo extends base {
      get foo() {
        return 'Hello';
      }
    }

The unit tests for this mixin would typically look like:

    class FooMixinElement extends FooMixin(HTMLElement) {}
    const fixture = new FooMixinElement();
    assert.equal(fixture.foo, 'Hello');

In some cases, it may be expedient to use other mixins in constructing test
fixtures, but over time, it is desirable to isolate which mixin each test
exercises.

Components that use multiple mixins can include tests that exercise the
integration of those mixins. These should generally test the end-user visible
interactions. E.g., if the
[Sample Mixin-Based Component](http://jsbin.com/wikowa/edit?html,output)
introduced above were a real component, one of its tests might simulate a click
on a child, and then confirm that the selected class was ultimately applied to
the clicked child. Such tests don't need to exhaustively duplicate everything
tested in the mixin unit tests, but confirm that the component's basic
functionality works as expected.
